chap. iiii. showing the order of working regeneration. 

now i proceed to declare, in what order the spirit of god pleaseth to perform this most admirable change: which is done in these four actions, which i shall lay down. first, the spirit of god working, in and with the law, (but tempered with the gospell) becomes a spirit of contrition, causing a man to see and feel his extreme sinfulness, and wretchedness, in so much that he is even wounded at the very heart therewith, and his sinful and unhappy estate becomes a woeful bondage & captivity unto him. the lord doth not alone raise up miserable terrors of conscience in him, in regard of some one or more gross offences that he hath actually committed, (although often he maketh these very terrors, a means of making himself a passage to enter in at), but he opens the eyes of the mind, to see the very mud and filth of the soul, that lay at the bottom before unseen and undiscerned. the spirit convinceth him of sin: it shows him that general wickedness and sinfulness of his nature, whereof we spake before. now he feels his unbelief, pride, ignorance, hypocrisy, and other heart-corruptions. he judgeth himself worthy to be destroyed, not alone having a sight of his own inability to escape damnation: but likewise of the justice of god in damning him, so that he doth even stoop and yield himself thereto. whereas before he was alive without the law, not having the true knowledge of it, now the law comming in the sound power and working of it, through the strength of the holy ghost; causeth that he becomes dead in his own sense, and apprehension: but sin becomes alive to his sense and feeling; and he perceiuing the strength, force, violence, and mischievousness of it, more then ever before, now cries out with the apostle, o miserable man that i am! and now confesseth that he is carnal and sold under sin, as the same apostle did, in the same sense of his naturall wretchednesse, which the comming of the life of grace had brought with it. thus the death of sin begins to be changed into life, in that it is felt and discerned. for the very first working of this new life, must needs be a feeling of the old death in sins and trespasses: not (i say) alone of his death in hell, in regard of his deserving the torments thereof, but of his death in sins and trespasses, of his utter inability to do any good thing, of his utter emptiness of all heavenly graces; of his extreme slavery to ungodliness, and unrighteousness, and all the lusts of the flesh; and of his perpetuall and vehement proneness to all abomination and wickedness. there is often (i confesse) a work, and a very terrible work, of the law & the naturall conscience together, procuring most extreme and hideously-bitter pangs, and hellish agonies in the soul of man; where the spirit of regeneration neither is, nor ever shall be: this being alone a fruite of the spirit of bondage, not of the spirit of grace. and oftentimes againe, the spirit of sanctification comes into ye soul, together with this spirit of bondage, making a violent entry, and by main force breaking open the heart; formerly locked and barred against it; and so beginning this saving work of holiness. but terrors of conscience, which may be in all unregenerate men, (because they are already in all the damned, into whom no part nor peece of regeneration can enter) is far different from this first degree of the work of a new birth. the sanctifying spirit, lays the filthiness, not alone the danger of sin, before the eyes of the mind. it causeth a man, not alone to be in extreme anguish, because he fears he must be damned: but even to loathe and abhor himself, and to be very vile in his own eyes, because he knowes he hath deserved to be damned: and that so foul a thing as sin, (wherewith his maker hath due cause to be so much displeased) doth not alone abide, but reign and command in him. wherefore he doth even lie down at the foote of the throne of gods justice, and in a most ardent abhorring of himself, doth subscribe to the righteousness of god in his own feared destruction; having nothing in the world to say for himself (as of himselfe), why he should not be destroyed: and not so much as a tittle of a word to object against the perfect and exact equity of the living god, if that he should destroy him. sin, i say sin, not alone the punishment of sin, but sin it self, is discovered unto him: he sees its loathsomeness and vileness; he sees its strength and violence; he sees his own total defilement; he perceives himself thoroughly, and thoroughly polluted with it: and cries out bitterly, ah what shall i do! not only, nor so much, because i shall be damned; but because i am so wicked, so sinful, so contrary to god, so rebellious against him, so very a traitor unto him, and so utterly unable to mend these woeful disorders of my soul. these be his groans, these be his complaints, and his cryings out are of his wickedness and iniquity, wherein he was conceived, wherein he was born, wherein he hath liued; and whereof now he perceiueth not so much as one part of his heart, or of his life, to be clean, and vnspotted. this acknowledgement and sense of our sinfulness, is the very first beginning of holiness. the unregenerate often sees and feels his damnation; the regenerate alone his sinfulness, the miserable depravation of his nature; the utter, total, odious, pollution of his whole man; being so loathsome, that he sees god cannot choose in justice but detest him, and for any thing that is in himself, for ever reject him. this apprehension of sinfulness is mixed always at first (at least often) with the fear of gods wrath and vengeance: but it doth so temper and allay that fear, as the bitterness thereof, carries not the soul furiously to contend against god, as else he could not choose but do. for his hatred is not stirred now against god, whom in truth (by virtue of a secret, unfelt, and undiscerned hope, that the spirit of god hath created, and doth uphold in him) he loveth, and honoreth, though he be more then half in doubt, lest he may destroy him: but alone against himself, his wretched hatefull self, that is so intollerably wicked and naught, that he can see no cause, but that the lord should glorify his equity and justice, in damning him. and so much for this first work of regeneration: the second follows it close at the heels, and is nothing else, but an earnest desire of attaining holiness and virtue, together with remission of sins, and the favor of god in christ jesus. for you must conceive the party that is now in regenerating, to have a general knowledge of the doctrine of the gospel, and a general assent also to the truth of it: this doctrine being (as i said before) an instrumental cause of regeneration. but now the general knowledge begins to bee made special, and the man touched with a sense of sin, is moved also with a most vehement longing after grace and mercy; not alone to pardon his sin, but also to heal his soul of it, as of a desperate wound, which he feeleth to be most smarting and mortal. so he cries out, who shall deliver me from this body of death? no hungry man did ever, with a more eager appetite, wish for meat; nor thirsty man for drink; nor covetous man for money; nor ambitious man, for advancement, then he now longeth to be reconciled unto god in christ; to have his foul nature made clean, his woeful sins forgiven, his abominable corruptions removed, and killed, and holiness planted in their room. oh how fain he would be holy! o how fain would he be humble, faithfull, obedient! how fain he would believe in, love, fear, serve god! but, ah wretch that he is, he cannot: woe, woe, unto him, he cannot. o, how shall he be able to prevail against these vile disorders of his heart, and life? how shall he do to be less sinful, and more righteous? these be his thoughts, these his wishes, these his groans: he findes so great a misse of nothing, as of the pardon of his sin, and the graces of the spirit of god; and if he had that bestowed upon him, were he a beggar, a prisoner, a slave, any thing; yet he should seeme to himself an happy man: and, ah lord, (thinkes he) that thou wouldest be pleased, for christ his sake, to forgiue my wickedness, and to heal my nature. now the thirst that he had after the things of this world, is wonderfully cooled; and, (as a man in a burning fit of an ague, makes no reckoning of his fine cloathes) he doth almost put off all those desires, and poore or not poore, esteemed or not esteemed, it is no great matter; but that he might be accepted into the favor of god, and have his sins pardoned and subdued, and his unholy nature made holy, that is all in all within him. there is to be seene in vnsanctified men, in case of terrors of conscience, (which sometimes do lie long upon them) a great desire to be free from the insufferable euils they see comming upon them. for, who can make question, but that iudas would fain not have been damned? or, that the damned in hell have not a wonderfull desire get out of their torments? this being one main aggrauation of their pangs, that they cannot but desire, to be deliuered out of those euils, which they cannot escape. but they, not having the supportation of the spirit of god to vnderprop them with hope, do vanish in these desires, and lose the fruit of them for lack of a kindly working of them towards the lord: for they be not lifted up to heauen-ward. but the man that is now in framing a new, (being sustained with the fore-mentioned secret hope) hath vehement and setled wishes, fixed and fastened in him; whereby he thirsteth after the grace of god, not alone to saue, but also to amend him. so the desires of the sanctified arising from the spirit, are differenced from the desires of the vnsanctified, that are meere fruits of nature, (which would fain be wel eased of an heauie burthen) by these two things: first, that they are directed unto god, whereas the other are rouing and confused desires. secondly, by their being set, always, as well (often as much, somtimes more) upon holiness, as upon freedome from punishment: upon the getting of virtue and goodnesse, as upon the getting of an heavenly kingdome; wheras the heart of the vnsanctified is so taken up, (when he must needs feel it) with the sense of his misery and punishment, that he cannot have while to settle any part of his longings, upon the renewing of his soul by grace; and so far is the work of a new birth well proceeded. the poore dead man, being so far awakened out of his senselesse death in sin, that with great disquietment he feels it, and with heartiest workings of his soul doth couet to come out of it: which last i take to bee the hungring and thirsting after righteousnesse; noted by our sauiour as a blessed note of blessednesse. in the third place, there is dropped into him the spirit of grace and supplications, by which he is at length imboldened to go unto god, and in some solemne and expresse manner, to utter his confessions and petitions; which before (perhaps) for some good space of time he could not dare to do. for the former two workes of grace do often (a great while together) show themselues in sighes and grones, and sudden & strong eiaculations, & secret & vndissembled boylings up of desire, in deep wishes & longings, afore the poore sinner can take so much hart to himself, as to make a formed and setled prayer unto god. but after the working of these motions some while, he puts upon himself the resolution of the king of nineueh, and saith within himself, let me cry mightily unto the lord of heaven & earth; his mercies are infinite, who can tel, but that be may have mercy upon me, that i perish not? (so is his secret sustaining hope, now formed and fashioned into the right proportion of a saving grace, and shows it self manifestly within him), he saith to himself, there is hope concerning this thing; and therefore i will cry, and continue crying, and let the lord do what he pleaseth unto me. then down upon his knees he fals, and with his hands and eyes lifted up to the throne of grace (yet almost afraid and ashamed to looke thither, and therefore ready often to rise up, and start backe againe), he dares at last to poure forth his lamentable confessions into gods bosome; whom now he hopes he may have leaue to call father, though (alacke) he have been too too vngracious a child. thus he proceeds to arraigne and accuse himself; acknowledging (for which he hates himself, because it is so plaine that he cannot but know it), that he hath sinned in such and such, and such and such particulars; and that he hath a most filthy heart, as full of wicked inclinations and thoughts, he thinkes verily, as the sea it self is full of water. wherefore he passeth a very sharpe sentence upon himself, and that also very sharpely; plainly saying, with an inward assenting of his very soul, that he is fully worthy of all those plagues and punishments, which the lord hath threatened in his word, and will execute in hell; and that it should not be in the least degree iniurious, if god would not be mercifull unto him: for ah! how vnfit is he to receive mercy? but yet withall, he takes heart in the most humble abasement of himself, most earnestly to call, and cry, and beg for mercy, and forgiuenesse, and for the work of grace, to change his nature from that loathsome disposition which troubles him: now it may be, by the working of hope, having his heart so much softened, that teares (before stopped up by that binding force, that strong and secret sorrowes show themselues to have in mans heart) do even begin to flow forth from him, to adde (if it might bee) a greater feruor unto his prayers. and if at first, second, third, fourth, and (it may be) many more times, he seeme to have cried in vaine; because none answere commeth, but heaven it self seemes strongly stopped up against him: yet he goes againe still to the same throne of grace, againe reckoning up the same, and (if he can also) new sins, againe bewailing them bitterly, and heartily imploring both pardon and help againe. this is to come unto christ jesus heauie laden, as our sauiour comfortably inuiteth us; this is to seeke god while he may bee found, and to call upon him while he is neere, as the prophet exhorteth us. which having done, he knowes not what to do more; and therefore even casts himself upon gods goodnesse through jesus christ; and knowing that in him (the son) the father is well pleased, he striues to rest in him, continuing to knocke, continuing to seeke, because his heart giues him, yt at last he shall not faile to find acceptance. and this spirit of prayer seemeth to me so proper to the regenerate, that it cānot any way befal the unregenerate: who when he feeleth not his misery, doth but multiply idle words in seeming to pray, when he feeleth it is so wholly drowned and swallowed up thereby, that he cannot runne unto heaven for help. but with the regenerate, prayers and supplications are always found, and a continuing therein also, how many bitter repulses soeuer he suffers at gods hand; as often he doth very many, the lord either deferring or making more speed to answere, as he sees most behoofefull for the profit of each of his seruants; and proportioning the fruit of his grace this way, to his knowledge of their ability and fitnesse to receive an answere, or to brooke delayes. it must not be denied, but that the man that neuer shall be regenerate (in the griping and twinges of his accusing conscience, through the working of the law, and the bare illumination of the spirit) may come so far, as to roare out his lord have mercy upon me, very often: yea, he may by perswasion and entreatie of friends, be brought to reade some good prayers out of a prayer-booke: yea, to be glad to have an other pray for him, in his own hearing; and in some sense also, to ioyne with him: yea more, by frequent perswading, vrging, teaching of some godly man, he may be drawne to pray for himself; but yet still the spirit of prayer is absent, in that he doth not finde himself by an inward moouing of his own heart) inclined (in the middest of his griefes and feares) to betake himself (to god for help, by calling upon his name. and (which is a main obseruation in this matter) if he pray, he prayes almost altogether for pardon, and for favor, little for grace and holiness; whereas the christian man, (by a secret drawing of his own inward soul, wrought by this regenerating spirit) comes unto the lord with his requests, begging grace and holiness, with no less earnestnesse, then remission and slavation. yea, and having once begun this course, he finds so much refreshing thereby, that he cannot but continue to do it, even sometimes with much strugling against, of his own hart, through fears and doubtings thereof. so it is one thing to bee perswaded to pray by men, and to do it for ease sake; another thing to be inclined unto it, by the priuate and secret working of the spirit. one thing to beg for pardon, not much minding amendment; another thing to crie for the help of god to reforme ones heart and soul, as well as his free favor to pardon former offences. an vnsanctified man, by benefit of christian acquaintance, in long and heauie terrours, may come to the one of these; to the other, alone the spirit of sanctification can leade one. to which passe, when the heart is once brought at length, the fourth act of the holy ghost doth plainely show it self; for it becomes a spirit of adoption within him, the very earnest penny of slavation, sealing up unto him the favor of god, the pardon of sin, the attaining of life; and by a new (and in truth considering the difference of former times) a strange work, perswading him, that god is reconciled unto him, and hath accepted him for his childe. as it made him able to take unto him words, and go unto the lord, crauing to bee accepted graciously: so it brings him word againe from god, that he shalbe, yea, that he is, accepted gratiously; and answering him (euen as, one would say, with a sensible answer in the middest of his prayers oft-times) so strongly and vndoubtedlie ures him of his being heard, that he makes, for the time, no more question of it then whither he liues yea, or no. from which assurance of spirit (hauing tasted the sweetnesse of gods grace, and felt how good the consolations of his word and spirit are) he growes resolute in his very soul, for the time to come, in all things, to please god, and finds a new kind of disposition, inabling him to auoide evil, and do good; so having put his necke under the gentle and easy yoke of christ jesus, he finds rest unto his soul: and thus is christ formed in him, and he transformed into a new creature. for this firme purpose of will to please god in all things, is so manifest, and euident, and sensible a work of grace; that now we may say, this act of regeneration is growne to some good ripenesse, and even now perfected in him: before he was in making a new man; but now he is made new: now he is begotten againe, and become a son of god, and heire of his kingdome, and fellow-heire of christ. i know that it may befall an hypocrite (lying under the burthen of a terrified conscience, which may be totally and perpetually separated from regeneration, and regeneration from it) by the diligent inculcating of the comforts of the gospel, and the earnest labor of some christian and godly men (that in such case would fain speake peace), to bee brought (because they are told, there is none other way of comfort) to a purpose of neuer committing such and such gross sins, as they are accused of in their own soules; and to some promise of amendment of life: but this is rather a resolution forced upon them by striuing of others, hereupon promising comfort; then a thing growing in themselues, out of the sense of the louing kindnesse of the lord their god. whereas a christian finds somewhat within him, inclining him, and making him to say within himself, and even little less then to sweare and vow with david, that he will surely keepe the righteous iudgements of the lord, and that in all things, and for ever, to his dying day. and thus is the work of regeneratiō brought to some perfectiō, thus doth the holy ghost mould the soul of a man into a new fashion; thus doth he stampe upon him a new image, and as you would say, the very lineaments and proportion of god his father, whom in a sweete likenesse (that makes him amiable to god and angels), he begins to resemble. only my brethren understand you one thing for the better conceiuing of all that hath been spoken. there are two sorts of regenerate men in the world. some it pleaseth god to call to himself, even very betimes, dropping pietie and grace into them, almost together with their mothers milke (by benefit of that great favor of god, holy and christian education), and that even in certaine insensible degrees; so that they cannot so easily name the beginning and progression of this work. in these all the forenamed things are most manifestly found (for in truth the working of them doth not cease, till life cease); and that so, as sometimes the one of these workes of grace is more strong then the other. sometimes they find a more sensible abasement of themselues within their own hearts, out of the apprehension of their sinfulnesse; sometimes desires and prayers are more vehement; sometimes a comfortable resolution of pleasing god, doth more mightily stirre in them: yet because of the early working, and that they were wrought in a still manner by very small degrees, the work did almost go beyond obseruation; and they cannot so distinctly tell when they began to be abased, when to be raised up. but there is another sort of men regenerate, who did liue a long time in vnregeneracie; yea perhaps also in profanenes, and notable and notorious wickedness, (for oft it falleth out that the pharisies and scribes make less haste to the kingdome of heaven, then the publicans and sinners, i meane that the gross offenders are sooner regenerated then the ciuill liuers). now for such men, it pleaseth the holy ghost many times, yea most times, to work these four fore-rehearsed workes, very distinctly; making as it were some euident pause, betwixt each of them, and grace goes forward in them, even step after step, in the manner that hath been described. most times, if not always, (the difference of their former life, when they were but dead, making the matter euident enough), they can name, when, and where, and by what means, the lord began first to lay them low, to pull them down; and (as they say, in nature corruption and generation go together) to kil their old man by terrors; till being so slaine, he had in a calmer manner shewed them the filthiness and lothsomnesse of it. they can tell, what longings they felt before they durst pray; and what adoe they had to bring themselues to pray; and then, how long they continued praying, before they were answered; and lastly, whē that sweet tidings came, that rauished their soul with ioy, and made them so inamoured of gods goodnesse, that they even made a strong covenant with him, to walke in his waies and keepe his iudgements. all these things (i say) they can tell well, and nothing doth them more good, then to recount with themselues, this mightie act of the most high; whereby their foules (with as great a miracle as once lazarus his body) were raised up from the rotten graue of sin, wherein they lay (wrapt up in the winding sheet of hardnesse of heart, and blindnesse of mind) stinking and putrifying; & (as a carcasse crawleth with wormes) swarming with those noysome lusts, that are able to poyson up an honest heart. 

