chap. i. what selfishness and self-denyal are; at the root.

i have already spoken of conversion in the foregoing 
discourse, both opening to you the true nature of it, and 
the reasons of its necessity, and perswading men thereunto. 
but lest so great a work should miscarry with any for want 
of a more particular explication, i should next open the 
three great parts of the work distinctly and in order: that 
is, 1. from what it is that we must turn: 2. to whom we 
must turn: 3. and by whom we must turn. for though i 
touched all these

in the foregoing directions, and through the discourse; yet 
i am afraid lest so brief a touch should be uneffectual.

the first of these i shall handle at this time from this 
text, medling with no more but what is necessary to our 
present business.

you may easily perceive that the doctrine which christ here 
proclaimeth to all that have thoughts of being his 
followers, is this, that [all that will be christians, must 
deny themselves, and take up their cross, and follow 
christ, and not reserve so much as their very lives, but 
resolve to resign up all for him.]

self-denyal is one part of true conversion: for the opening 
of this i must shew you; 1. what is meant by self; and 2. 
what by denying this self: and 3. the grounds and reasons 
of the point: and 4. i shall briefly apply it.

i. self, is sometime taken for the very person, consisting 
of soul and body simply considered: and this is called 
natural or personal self. 2. self is taken for this person 
considered in its capacity of earthly comforts, and in 
relation to the present blessings of this world that tend 
to the prosperity of man as in the flesh: and this may be 
called earthly self (yet in an innocent sense.) 3. self is 
taken for the person as corrupted by inordinate sinful 
sensuality; which may be called carnal self. 4. self may be 
taken for the person in his sanctified estate; which is 
spiritual self. 5. and self may be taken for the person in 
his naturals and spirituals conjunct, as he is capable of a 
life of everlasting felicity; which is the immortal self.

ii. by denying self, is meant disclaiming, renouncing, 
disowning, and forsaking it. self is here lookt on partly 
as a party dis and partlyunct from christ, and withdrawn 
from its due subordination to god,

as his competitor and opposite: and accordingly it is to be 
denyed, partly by a neglect, and partly by an opposition.

before i come to tell you how far self must be denyed, i 
must tell you wherein the disease of selfishness doth 
consist; and for brevity we shall dispatch them both 
together.

and on the negative, 1. to be a natural individual person 
distinct from god our creator, is none of our disease, but 
the state which we were created in. and therefore no man 
must under pretence of self-denyal either destroy himself, 
or yet with some hereticks aspire to be essentially and 
personally one with god, so that their individual 
personality should be drowned in him as a drop is in the 
ocean.

2. the disease of selfishness lyeth not in having a body 
that is capable of asting sweetness in the creature, or in 
having the objects of our sence in which we be delighted, 
nor yet in all actual sweetness and delight in them; nor in 
a simple love of life it self: for all these are the 
effects of the creators will. and therefore this selfdenyal 
doth not consist in a hatred or disregard of our own lives; 
or in a destruction of our appetites or senses, or an 
absolute refusal to please them in the use of the 
creatures, which god hath given us.

3. yea though our natures are corrupted by sin, selfdenyal 
requireth not that we should kill our selves, and destroy 
our humane natures that we may thereby destroy the sin. 
self-murder is a most hainous sin, which god condemneth.

4. our spiritual self, or self as sanctified must not be so 
denyed, as to deny our selves to be what we are, or have 
what we have, or do what we do: we may not deny gods 
graces; nor deny that they are in us as the subject, nor 
may we restrain the holy desires which

god exciteth in us; or deny to fulfil them, or bring them 
towards fruition, when opportunity is offered us.

5. we may not deny to accept of any mercy which god shall 
offer us, though but a common creature: nor to use any 
talent for his service if he choose us for his stewards; 
much less may we refuse any spiritual mercy, that may 
further our salvation: it is not the self-denyal required 
by christ, that we deny to be christians, or to be 
sanctified by the spirit, or to he delivered from our sins 
and enemies; or that we deny to use the means and helps 
that are offered us, or to accept of the priviledges 
purchased by christ: much less to deny our salvation it 
self, and to undo our own souls. in a word, it is not any 
thing that is really and finally to our hurt or loss.

but (as to the affirmative) i shall shew you what the 
disease of selfishness indeed is, and so what self-denyal 
is. 1. when god had created man in his own image, he gave 
him a holy disposition of soul, which might incline him to 
his maker as his only felicity and ultimate end. he made 
him to be blessed in the sight of his glory, and in the 
everlasting love of god, and delight in him, and praises of 
him. this excellent employment and glory did god both fit 
him for, and set before him.

but the first temptation did entice him to adhere to an 
inferiour good, for the pleasing of his flesh, and the 
advancement of him self to a carnal kind of felicity in 
himself, that he might be as god in knowing good and evil. 
and thus man was suddenly taken with the creature as a 
means to the pleasing of his carnal self, and so did depart 
from god his true felicity; and retired into himself in his 
estimation, affection, and intention; and delivered up his 
reason in subjection to his sensuality, and made himself 
his ultimate end.

with this sinful inclination are we all born into the 
world; so that every man according to his corrupted nature 
doth terminate all his desires in himself: and what ever he 
may notionally be convinced of to the contrary, yet 
practically he makes his earthly life and the advancement 
and pleasure which he expecteth therein, to be his felicity 
and end.

self-denyal now is the cure of this: it carryeth a man from 
himself again, and sheweth him that he was never made to be 
his own felicity or end; and that the flesh was not made to 
be pleased before god; and that it is so poor, and low, and 
short a felicity, as indeed is but a name and shadow of 
felicity, and when it pretends to that, a meer deceit. it 
sheweth him how unreasonable, how impious and unjust it is, 
that a creature and such a creature, should terminate his 
desires and intentions in himself: and this is the 
principal part of self-denyal.

2. as god was mans ultimate end in his state of innocency, 
so accordingly man was appointed to use all creatures in 
order to god, for his pleasure and glory. so that it was 
the work of man to do his makers will, and he was to use 
nothing but with this intention.

but when man was faln from god to himself, he afterwards 
used all things for himself, even his carnal self; and all 
that he possessed was become the provision and fuel of his 
lusts; and so the whole creation which he was capable of 
using, was abused by him to this low and selfish end, as if 
all things had been made but for his delight and will.

but when man is brought to deny himself, he is brought to 
restore the creatures to their former use, and not to 
sacrifice them to his fleshly mind; so that all that he 
hath and useth in the world, is used to another end (so far 
as he denyeth himself) than formerly it was; even for god 
and not himelf.

3. in the state of innocency, though man had naturally an 
aversness from death and bodily pains, as being natural 
evils, and had a desire of the welfare even of the flesh it 
self; yet as his body was subject to his soul, and his 
senses to his reason, so his bodily ease and welfare was to 
be esteemed and desired and sought, but in a due 
subordination to his spiritual welfare, and especially to 
his makers will. so that though he was to value his life, 
yet he was much more to value his everlasting life, and the 
pleasure and glory of his lord.

but now when man is faln from god to himself, his life and 
earthly felicity is the sweetest and the dearest thing to 
him that is. so that he preferreth it before the pleasing 
of god and everlasting life: and therefore he seeketh it 
more, and holdeth it faster as long as he can, and parteth 
with it more unwillingly. as innocent nature had an 
appetite to the objects of sense; but corrupted nature hath 
an enraged, greedy, rebellious and inordinate appetite to 
them: so innocent nature had a love to this natural earthly 
life and the comforts of it: but corrupted nature hath such 
an inordinate love to them, as that all things else are 
made but subordinate to them, and swallowed up in this 
gulf: even god himself is so far loved as he befriendeth 
these our carnal ends, and furthereth our earthly 
prosperity and life.

but when men are brought to deny themselves, they are in 
their measures restored to their first esteem of life and 
all the prosperity and earthly comforts of life. now they 
have learned so to love them as to love god better; and so 
to value them as to prefer everlasting life before them; 
and so to hold them and seek their preservation as to 
resign them to the will of god, and to lay them down when 
we cannot hold them with his love, and to choose death in 
order to life everlasting, before that life which would 
deprive us of it. and this is the principal instance

of self-denyal which christ giveth us here in the text, as 
it is recited by all the three evangelists that recite 
these words, [he that saveth his life shall lose it, &c. 
and what shall it profit a man to win all the world and 
lose his soul?] by these instances it appears, that by 
self-denyal christ doth mean a setting so light by all the 
world, and by our own lives, and consequently, our carnal 
content in these, as to be willing and resolved to part 
with them all, rather than with him and everlasting life: 
even as abraham was bound to love his son isaac, but yet so 
to prefer the love and will of god, as to be able to 
sacrifice his son at gods command.

and the lord jesus himself was the liveliest pattern to us 
of his self-denyal that ever the world saw: indeed his 
whole life was a continued practice of it. and it hath oft 
convinced me that it is a special part of our 
sanctification, when i have considered how abundantly the 
lord hath exercised himself in it for our example. for as 
it is desperate to think with the socinians that he did it 
only for our example; so it is also a desperate error of 
others, to think that it was only for satisfaction to god, 
and not at all for our example. many do give up themselves 
to flesh-pleasing, upon a misconceit that christ did 
therefore deny his flesh, to purchase them a liberty to 
please theirs. as in his fasting and temptations, and his 
sufferings by the reproach and ingratitude of men, and the 
outward poverty and meanness of his condition, the lord was 
pleased to deny himself; so especially in his last passion 
and death. as i have shewed elsewhere, he loved his natural 
life and peace: and therefore in manifestation of that, he 
prayeth, father, if it be thy will, let this cup pass from 
me: but yet when it came to the comparative practical act, 
he proceeded to choose his fathers will with death, rather 
than life without it, and therefore saith, [not my will 
(that is, my

simple love of life) but thy will be done.] in which very 
words he manifesteth another will of his own, besides that, 
which he consenteth shall not be done, and sheweth that he 
preferred the pleasing of his father in the redemption of 
the world, before his own life. and thus in their measure 
he causeth all his members to do: so that life, and all the 
comforts of life, are not so dear to them as the love of 
god and everlasting life.

4. when god had created man, he was presently the owner of 
him, and man understood this that he was god's, and not his 
own. and he was not to claim a propriety in himself, nor to 
be affected to himself as his own, nor to live as his own, 
but as his that made him.

but when he fell from god, he arrogated practically (though 
notionally he may deny it) a propriety in himself, and 
useth himself accordingly.

and when christ bringeth men to deny themselves, they cease 
to be their own in their conceits any more; then they 
resign themselves wholly to god as being wholly his. they 
know they are his, both by the right of creation and of 
redemption: and therefore are to be disposed of by him, and 
to glorifie him in body and spirit which are his, 1 cor. 6. 
19, 20. rom. 14. 9. to be thus heartily devoted to god as 
his own, is the form of sanctification; and to live as 
god's own, is the truly holy life.

5. as man in innocency did know that he was not his own; so 
he knew that nothing that he had was his own; but that he 
was the steward of his creator, for whom he was to use 
them, and to whom he was accountable.

but when he was fallen from god to himself, though he had 
lost the right of a servant, yet be graspeth at the 
creature, as if he had the right of a lord: he now takes 
his goods, his lands his money to be his own: and therefore 
he thinks he may use them for himself, and give

god only some small contribution, lest he should disturb 
his possession: he saith as the impious ones, psal. 12. 4. 
[our lips are our own; who is lord over us?] though all of 
them know speculatively that all is gods, yet practically 
they take it and use it as their own.

but when grace teacheth them to deny themselves, it 
strippeth them naked of all that they seemed proprietors 
of; and maketh them confess that nothing is their own, but 
all is gods; and to god they do devote it, and use it for 
him, and give him his own: which the first christians 
signified by selling all, and laying at the apostles feet. 
and therefore he asketh god what he shall do with it, and 
how he shall use it; and if god take it from him, he can 
bless the name of the lord with job, job 1. 21. as knowing 
he taketh but his own: and can say with eli, it is the 
lord, let him do what seemeth him good, 1 sam. 3. 18. he 
knows that god may do with his own as he list. mat. 20. 15. 
and that he can have nothing but of his bounty; and 
therefore that it is his mercy that leaveth him any thing; 
but it were no wrong to him if he took away all. and thus 
he understandeth that he is but a steward, and therefore 
must use all that he hath for him that he received it from. 
if he have children, his desire is to know which way they 
may be most serviceable to god: and to that he will devote 
them. if he have wealth, or honour, and power among men, 
his care is to know which way he may employ them for his 
masters use, and so he will imploy them. if he have wit and 
learning, his care is to serve god by it. if he have 
strength and time, he is thinking which way to improve them 
for his lord. and if vain companions, or the world, or 
fleshly delights would draw him to lay them out for them, 
he remembers that this were to waste his masters stock upon 
his enemies. so that though the sanctified man hath all 
things, yet he knows that he hath nothing. all things are 
his as gods steward: but

nothing is properly and ultimately his own. all things are 
his for god; but nothing is his for his carnal-self, nor 
ultimately for his personal or natural self. upon this 
ground he gives the devil, the world, and the flesh a 
denyal, when they would have his time, his tongue, his wit, 
his wealth, or any thing that he possesseth: he telleth 
them [they are none of mine, but god's: i received them, 
and i must be accountable for them. i had them not from 
you, and therefore i may not use them for you: i must give 
to god the things that are god's: that which is yours i 
will readily yield you. justice requireth that every one 
have his own.] and thus selfdenyal doth take off the 
sanctified from giving that which is god's unto themselves.

object. but do we not lawfully use his mercies for our 
selves? is not our meat, and drink, and cloaths, and 
houses, and goods our own, and may we not use them for our 
selves?

answ. improperly they are our own: so far our own, as that 
our fellow-servants may not take them from us without our 
lords consent: as every servant may have a peculiar stock 
entrusted in his hands, or may have his tools to do his 
work with, which indeed are his masters; but are his to 
use. but as to a strict propriety they are none of ours, 
but god is the only proprietary of the world.

and for the use of them, it may be for our selves in 
subordination to god, but never ultimately for our selves. 
we may not use one creature, but ultimately and principally 
for god. when we eat or drink, we must never make the 
pleasing of our appetite our end, but must do it to 
strengthen, and chear, and fit our selves for the service 
of god, and therefore we must first ask god, and not our 
appetite, what, and how much we must eat and drink: and we 
must no further please our

appetite, than the pleasing of it doth fit us for the 
service of god. it is the express command, 1 cor. 10. 31 
[whether ye eat or drink, or what ever ye do, do all to the 
glory of god.] you may not wear your cloaths meerly and 
ultimately for your bodies, but only to fit your bodies for 
gods service: and therefore you must advice with his word, 
and with your end, what you should put on. you may not 
provide a house to dwell in, nor friends, nor riches, nor 
any thing else for the pleasing of your flesh, as your 
ultimate end, but for the service of your lord. for you 
must put on the lord jesus christ, and make no provision 
for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof, rom. 13. 14.

6. as man had his being and well-being from god, so is it 
god only that can preserve and continue them. innocent man 
understood this, and therefore lived in a dependance upon 
god; looking to his hand for the supply of his wants, and 
casting all his care upon him, and trusting him wholly with 
himself, and all, and not distracting his own mind with 
cares and distrustful fears, but quieted and contented his 
mind in the wisdom, goodness, and all-sufficienly of god.

but when man was fallen to himself from god, he desired 
presently to have his portion or stock in his own hands, 
and grew distrustful of god, and began to look upon himself 
as his own preserver; (in a great measure) and therefore he 
fell to carking and caring for himself, and to studious 
contrivances for his own preservation and supplies. he 
searched every creature for himself, and laboured to find 
in it some good for himself, as if the care of himself had 
been wholly divolved on himself. i have been as much 
troubled to understand that text in gen. 3. 22. as any one 
almost in the bible, being somewhat unsatisfied with some 
ordinary expositions; and yet it is too hard for me. but 
this seems to me the

most probable interpretation; that in his estate of 
innocency adam was as a child in his fathers house, that 
was only to study to please his father, and to do the work 
that he commanded him, but not to take any thought or care 
for himself: for while he was obedient, it was his fathers 
part to preserve him and provide for him, to keep off death 
and danger, and supply all his wants. and therefore though 
man had the faculty or power of knowing more perfect than 
we have now, yet he did not need to trouble himself about 
these matters of self, because they belonged to god: and 
consequently had not the actual consideration of knowledge 
of them: for that would have been but a vain and 
troublesome knowledge and consideration to him: for though 
the knowledge of all things necessary to be known, was part 
of his perfection, yet the actual knowledge of many things 
unnecessary and vexatious or tempring, may be part of a 
mans infelicity and misery. and so he that increaseth 
knowledge increaseth sorrow, eccl. 1. 18. as man that 
foreknoweth his own death, is through the fear of it all 
his life time subject to bondage, heb. 2. 15. and the fear 
is more grievous than the death it self; when a beast that 
knoweth not his death is freed from those fears. indeed in 
our faln estate there is some use for more of this kind of 
knowledge than before; but in innocency man needed only to 
know his maker, and his will and works, and the creature as 
his utensils, and the glass in which he was to be seen, and 
to fear with moderation the death which he had threatned, 
meerly as threatned by him. but by the temptation of satan, 
man grew desirous to be past a child, at his fathers 
finding, and under his care, and would take care and 
thought for himself and know what was good or evil for 
himself as to the natural man: and so far turned his eye to 
the creature to study it for himself, when he should have 
studied god in it: and to search after good and evil to 
himself in it, which he

should have searched after the attributes of god in it, and 
daily gazed with holy love and admiration upon his blessed 
face that shined in this glass: and so he would use the 
creature directly for himself, which he should have used 
only for gods service. and thus i conceive man did indeed 
by his fall attain to much more actual knowledge as to the 
number of objects than he had before: which knowledge was 
indeed in it self considered physically good, but not good 
to him as any part of his felicity, or his vertue, but 
rather by participation his sin and misery, as being 
unsuitable to his condition. it was better with him when he 
knew one god, and all things in god as they conduced to the 
love and service of god, and were suitable to his state, 
than when he turned his mind from god, and fell to study 
the creature in it self, and for himself, as good or evil 
to himself, and so lost himself and his understanding in a 
crowd of unnecessary and misused objects: like a foolish 
patient that having a most judicious and faithful physitian 
that will take care of his health, and provide him the best 
and safest remedies, doth grow to an eager desire to be 
acquainted himself with the nature of each medicine and to 
be skilful in the cure of his own disease, that he may 
trust his physitian no longer, but may be his own 
physitian: and therefore hearkneth to a seducer that tells 
him [the physitian doth but keep thee in ignorance, lest 
thou shouldst be as wise as he, and able to cure or 
preserve thy self, hearken to me, and i will teach thee to 
known all these things thy self, and so thou maist take 
care of thy self.] so man was seduced by satan to withdraw 
himself from the fatherly care of god, by a desire himself 
to be wise for himself in the knowledge of all that in the 
creature which might be directly good or evil to himself, 
so taking on himself the work of god, and casting off the 
work that god had set him, and withdrawing himself from his 
necessary dependence on his maker. and accordingly

much of this selfishness knowledge of the creature he did 
attain: but with the woful loss of the divine knowledge of 
the creature, and of the filial soul-contenting knowledge 
of god: yea and of himself, as in his due subordination to 
god. this seems the sence of this text, and this is the 
case of faln mankind.

naturally now every man would fain have his safety and 
comforts in his own hand. he thinks them not so sure and 
well in the hand of god: o what would a carnal man give 
that he had but his life and health in his own hand, and 
might keep them as long as he saw good! when he is poor, he 
had rather it were in his hand to supply his wants, than in 
gods; for he thinks it would go better with him. when he is 
sick, he had far rather it were in his own hand to cure 
him, than in gods, for then he should be sure of it. if he 
be in any strait, he cannot be content with a bare promise 
for his deliverance; but unless he see some probability in 
the means, and work, and unless he be acquainted with the 
particular way by which he must be delivered he is not 
satisfied: for he cannot trust god, so well as himself. is 
not this the case of all you that are carnal? would you not 
think your case much safer and better if it were in your 
own hands, than you do now it is in gods! what would you 
not give, that you were but as able to give ease, and heath 
and wealth, and honour, and life to your selves, as god is! 
hence it is that you so anxiously contrive for your selves, 
and trouble your selves with needless cares; because you 
dare not trust god, but think you are faln to your own care 
and finding. you think your selves quite undone when you 
have nothing left you but god and his promise to trust 
upon, and when you see nothing in your selves and the 
creature to support you. and thus are all men faln from god 
to themselves.

but sanctification teacheth men that self-denyal which

according to its measure, doth heal them of this disease. 
though some actual knowledge of good and evil, and some 
care of our natural selves be now become a necessary duty, 
as suited to our lapsed state, which yet had never been but 
through sin: yet that which is sinful, selfdenyal doth 
destroy. it sheweth man that he is every way insufficient 
for himself, and that he is not the fountain of his own 
felicity: nor doth it belong to him, but to god, to 
preserve him and secure his welfare. he seeth what a folly 
it is to depart from the tuition of his heavenly father, 
and as the prodigal son to desire to have his portion in 
his own hands. experience tells him with smart and sorrow 
that he hath not been so good a preserver of himself, nor 
used himself so well as to desire to be in the same hands 
any longer that have so abused him: yea he knoweth that it 
was god that indeed preserved him, while he was over 
solicitous about it himself, and would needs have the 
managing of his own affairs. he now believes that he can be 
no where safe but in the hands of god, and no way 
sufficiently provided for but by his wisdom, love and 
power: nor dare he trust himself hereafter with himself or 
any creature! he finds that he hath but turmoiled and 
distracted his mind by undertaking the management of his 
own preservation: and that he hath brought himself into a 
wilderness, and lost himself and ravelled his own affairs: 
when if he had committed himself to god, and been satisfied 
in his wisdom, love, and power, all had been kept safe and 
sound, and man had not been lost, nor his estate thus 
shattered and overthrown. and therefore the returning 
self-denying convert is brought to an utter distrust of 
himself, and resolved hereafter to trust himself upon 
nothing below all-sufficiency and infinite love. he is so 
offended with himself for his former self-destruction, and 
for undoing himself so foolishly, that he calls

himself to account and into judgement for it, and 
condemneth himself as a traytor to god, and a murderer of 
himself, and will no more be in the hands of so treacherous 
a delinquent: but as the eyes of a servant are on the hand 
of his master, so are his eyes on god for all supplies. and 
this is the part of the work of the spirit of adoption, who 
teacheth us to cry abba, father▪ and as children, not to be 
very careful for our selves, but to run to our father in 
all our wants, and tell him, what we stand in need of and 
beg relief: and to be careful for nothing: but in every 
thing by prayer with supplication and thanksgiving to make 
knownour requests to god, phil. 4. 6. and this acquiescence 
of the soul in the love of god, is it that keepeth our 
hearts and minds in that peace of god which passeth 
understanding, vers. 7. so that the more self-denyal, the 
less is a man dependant on himself, or troubled with the 
cares of his own preservation: and the more doth he cast 
himself on god, and is careful to please him that is his 
true preserver, and then quietech and resteth his mind in 
his all-sufficiency and infinite wisdom and love; and so is 
a meer dependant upon god.

7. moreover; it is the prerogative of god as absolute owner 
of us, to be the sole disposer of man and of all the other 
creatures: and to choose them their condition, and give 
them their several talents, and determine of the events of 
all their affairs, as pleaseth himself; and innocent man 
was contented with this order, and well pleased that god 
should be the absolute disposer of him and all.

but when man turned from god to self, he presently desired 
to be the disposer of himself; and not of himself only, but 
of all the creatures within his reach. how fain would 
selfish corrupted man be the chooser of his own condition? 
his will is against the will of god, and

he usually disliketh gods disposal. if he had the matter in 
his own hands, almost nothing should be as it is; but so 
cross would they be to god that all thing would be turned 
upside down: if it were at their will, there's scarce a 
poor man but would be rich: and scarce a rich man but would 
be richer: the servant would be master: the tenant would be 
a landlord: the husbandman and tradesman would be a 
gentleman: the labourer would live an easier life: his 
house should be better: his cloathing should be better; his 
fare should be better: his provision should be greater, his 
credit or honour with men should be more; the gentleman 
would be a knight, and the knight a lord, and the lord 
would be a king, and the king would be more absolute and 
have a larger dominion: nay every man would be a king, and 
learn the doctrine of the jews, and many of this age among 
us, to expect that the world should be ruled by them; and 
they should reign as lords and princes in the earth. if it 
were with selfish men as they would have it, there's scarce 
a man that would be what he is, nor dwell where he doth, 
nor live at the rates that now he liveth at. the weak would 
be always strong; and the sick would be well and always 
well; and the old would be young again; and never taste the 
infirmities of age; and if they might live as long as they 
would, i think there's few of the unsanctified that would 
ever die, nor look after heaven as long as they could live 
on earth. o what a brave life should i have, thinks the 
selfish unsanctified wretch, if i were but wholly at my own 
disposal, and might be what i would be, and have what i 
would have! what would men give for such a life as this? 
had they but their own wills, they would think themselves 
the happiest men on earth: that is, if they could be 
delivered from the will of god, and be from under his 
disposal, and get the reins into their own hands!

nay this is not all, but the selfish person would be the 
disposer of all the world within his reach, as well as of 
himself. he would have kingdoms at his dispose, and all 
things carried according to his will: he would have all his 
neighbours have a dependance upon him; very bountiful he 
would be, if he were the lord of all: for he would be the 
great benefactor of the world, and have all men beholden to 
him, and depend upon him. if he see things that little 
concern him, he hath a will of his own that would fain have 
the disposal of them. if he hear of the affairs of other 
nations, some will he hath of his own which he would have 
fulfilled in them, at least so far as any of his own 
interest may be involved in the business.

but when sanctification hath brought men to selfdenyal, 
then they discern and lament this folly: they see what 
silly giddy worms they are to be disposers of themselves, 
or of the world: they see that they have neither wisdom, 
nor goodness, nor power sufficient for so great a work. 
they then perceive that it were better make an ideot the 
pilot of a ship, or an infant to be their physitian when 
they are sick, or the disposer of their estates, than to 
commit themselves and the world to their dispose. they see 
how foolishly they have endeavoured or desired to rob god 
of his prerogative: and therefore they return from 
themselves to him, and give up all by free consent to his 
sole disposal, that so he may do with his own as he list. 
he finds that he hath work enough to do of his own, and is 
become too unfit for that: and therefore he dare no more 
undertake the work of god, for which he is infinitely 
unfit. he finds that the more he hath his own will, the 
worse it goes with him: and therefore he will give up 
himself to god and stand to his will: if he feels that 
providence doth cross his flesh, and that he hath poverty 
when the flesh would have riches, and

slame when that carnal self would have honour, and labour 
when the flesh would have ease, and sickness when the flesh 
would have health, he would not for all that have the work 
taken out of the hand of god, but truly saith, not my will 
but thine be done: and believeth that gods disposal is the 
best; and that his father knows well enough what he doth; 
and if it were put to his choice, whether god or he should 
be the disposer of his estate and honour and life, he had 
rather it were in gods hands than his own: and would not 
undertake the charge, if it were offered him. alas, thinks 
he, i am almost below a man and am i fit to make a god of? 
i come off so lamely in the duty of a creature as deserves 
damnation: and am i fit to arrogate the work of the creator?

8. moreover it is the high prerogative of god to be the 
soveraign ruler of the world; to make laws for them, which 
must be obeyed; and to reward the obedient, and punish the 
disobedient. god is king of all the earth; even king of 
kings, and lord of lords; and all shall obey him, or be 
judged by him for their disobedience.

but sin turned man into a rebel against heaven, and a 
traitor to his maker: so that now the selfish unsanctified 
man disliketh gods government, at least in the particulars, 
and would govern himself. the law of god contained in his 
word and works he murmurs at as too obscure, or too precise 
and strict for him. he finds that it crosseth his carnal 
interest, and speaks not good of him but evil, and 
therefore he is against it as supposing it to be against 
him and his pleasure, profit, and honour in the world. if 
men had but the government of themselves, what a difference 
would there be between their way and gods? if corrupt 
unsanctified selfish man might make a law for himself in 
stead of

the word of god, what a law would it be? and how much of 
the law of god should be repealed? if sinners might make a 
scripture, you should find in it no such passages as these, 
[except a man be converted, or born again, he cannot enter 
into the kingdom of heaven: without holiness none shall see 
god.] if self might make laws, you should not read in them 
[if ye live after the flesh ye shall die; but if by the 
spirit ye mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live▪] 
nor should you there find, that the gate is strait, and the 
way is narrow that leads to life, and few there be that 
find it; or that the righteous are scarcely saved] as all 
the scripture is now for holiness, and against 
prophaneness, ungodliness, and sensuality; if self had the 
framing of it, it should all be changed, and it should at 
least speak peace to fleshly-minded men: all those true and 
dreadful passages that speak fire and brimstone against the 
unsanctified, and threatned everlasting torments, should be 
razed out; and you shall find no talk of damnation in the 
scripture for such as they: no talk of the worm that never 
dyeth, or the fire that is never quenched, or of [depart 
from me all ye workers of iniquity; i know you not] or that 
[the way of the ungodly shall perish] or that [god doth 
laugh at them, because he seeth that their day is coming] 
abundance of the bible would be wiped out, if carnal self 
had but the altering of it: nay it would be quite made new, 
and made a contrary thing: the articles of our creed would 
be changed: the petitions of our rule for prayer would be 
most altered: every one of the ten commandments would be 
altered, as i shall after shew. idolatry should be no sin, 
but the principal law; for self would be set up as the idol 
of the world: will-worship would be no sin; men would he 
held guiltless that take the name of god in vain: the lords 
day should be a day of mirth and carnal pleasure: every 
subject

would be the soveraign; and every inferiour the superior; 
revenge would be made lawful for themselves, though not for 
others: fornication and adultery would be no mortal sin; 
stealing would be made tolerable to themselves; it should 
be lawful to them to do any wrong to the name and 
reputation of another: in a word, every man would do what 
he list, and his will should be his law, and himself should 
be his own judge; a gentle tender judge no doubt. thus 
would self rule.

but sanctification brings men to deny this self; and to lay 
down the arms of rebellion against god; and to see how 
unfit we are to rule our selves; that we are too foolish, 
and sinful, and partial to make laws, and too partial also 
and tender to execute them; and that as we were made to 
obey, so obey we must, and come again into our ranks, and 
willingly subject our selves to the soveraign of the world. 
self denyal teacheth a man to have his own carnal wisdom 
and reasonings that rise up against the laws of god; and to 
love them the worse because they are thus his own; and to 
love the laws of god the better, because they are god's, 
and because they are against his carnal self. the stamps of 
god on them doth make them currant with him, when if they 
had but the private stamps of self, he would disown them as 
counterfeit or treasonable. he hath indeed a flesh that is 
restrained by gods laws, and striveth against them; but he 
thinks never the worse of the law for that, but approveth 
and liketh it in the inner man: and if he might have his 
choice, he would not blot out one commandment, nor one 
direction, nor one article of faith, nor a tittle of the 
law, because that self is not the chooser in him; but he 
hath learned to submit to the will and wisdom of the lord.

and though he love himself, and have a nature that

is unwilling of suffering, and feareth the displeasure of 
god, and the threatnings of his holy law: yet doth he 
unfeignedly justifie the law, and acknowledge it to be 
holy, and just, and good; and would not have the very 
threatnings of it to be repealed and blotted out, if he had 
his choice: for he knows that the determinations of god are 
the best, and that none but he is fit to govern, and 
therefore he desires that he himself may be taught better 
to obey, and not that he may rule; and wisheth that he were 
more conformed to the law; and not that the law were 
conformed to him; and fain he would have his own will 
brought up to gods, but wisheth not gods will to be 
crookened and brought down to his. as far as men have 
self-denyal, this is so.

9. moreover, as it is gods prerogative to be the soveraign 
ruler of our selves, so also of all others as well as us. 
but when sin had set up self, man would not only rule 
himself, but would rule all others. an eager desire there 
is in the unsanctified selfish heart, that he might be 
ruler of town and country, and all might be brought to do 
his will. and hence it is that there is such resisting and 
grudging at good governors, and that men are so ambitious 
and fain would be highest, because they would have their 
own wills fulfilled by all, and therefore would have power 
to force men to it: hence it is that there is such a stir 
in the world for crowns and kingdoms: and few men have ever 
been heard of, that have refused a scepter when it was 
offered them, yea or that would not step out of their way 
for it, and wound their consciences, and hazard all their 
hopes of heaven for it, if they found themselves in a 
likelyhood of obtaining it; because where self doth raign 
at home, it would raign also over all others. nothing more 
pleaseth the carnal mind, than to have his will, and to 
have all men do what he would have them, and

to see all at his beck, and each man seeking to know his 
pleasure, ready to receive his word for law. this is the 
reign of self.

but sanctification teaching men self-denyal, doth make them 
look fist at the doing of gods will; and would have all the 
world obedient to that; and for their own wills, they 
resign them absolutely to gods, and would not have men obey 
them but in a due subordination to the lord. as they affect 
no dominion or government but for god, so they desire not 
men to obey their wills any further than it is necessary to 
the obedience of gods will, to which they are serviceable 
and conform. the self-denying sanctified man hath as 
careful an eye up and down the world for gods interest, as 
the self-seeker hath for his own: and as eagerly doth he 
long to hear of the setting up of the name, and kingdom, 
and will or laws of god in the world, as the ambitious man 
longs for the setting up of his own. and it as much 
rejoyceth the holy self-denying man to hear that gods laws 
are set up and obeyed, and that the world doth stoop to 
jesus christ, as it would rejoyce the carnal selfish wretch 
to be the lord and master of all himself, and his will 
become the law of the world. an holy self-denying man would 
be far gladder to hear that africa, america, and the rest 
of the unbelieving part of the world were converted to 
christ by the power of the gospel, and that the heathens 
were his inheritance, and the kingdoms of the world become 
the kingdoms of christ, than if he had conquered all these 
himself, and were become the king or emperour of the world. 
for as self is the chief interest of an unsanctified man; 
so christ and the will of god is the chief interest of the 
sanctified: for the hath destroyed the contradictory 
interest of self, and renounced it, and hath taken god for 
his end, and christ

for the way, and consequently for his highest interest: so 
that he hath now no business in the world but gods 
business; he hath no honour to regard but gods honour; he 
hath none to exalt but the king of kings; he knows no gain 
but the pleasing of god; he knows no content or pleasure 
but gods pleasure: for the life that he now lives in the 
flesh, he lives by faith of the son of god, that hath loved 
him and given himself for him; and thereby hath drawn him 
out of himself to the fountain and end of love; and so it 
is not he that lives, but christ liveth in him, gal. 2. 20.

10. lastly, it is the high prerogative of god, to have the 
honour and power and glory ascribed to him, and be praised 
as the author of all good to the world: and his glory he 
will not give to another: man and all things are created, 
and preserved and ordered for his glory: nor shall man have 
any glory but in the glorifying of his lord: when we fell 
short of glorifying the lord, we also fell short of the 
glory which we expected by him.

but when sin turned man from god to himself, he became 
regardless of the honour of god, and his mind was bent on 
his own honour, so that he would have every knee bow to 
himself, and every eye observe him, and every mind think 
highly of him, and every tongue to praise and magnifie him: 
it doth him good at the heart, to have vertue, and wisdom, 
and greatness ascribed to him, and an excellency in all; 
and to have all the good that is done ascribed to him, and 
to be taken to be as the sun in the firmament that all must 
eye, and none can live without, and to be esteemed the 
benefactor of all. when he hears that men extol him and 
speak nothing of him but well, and great things; and when 
he sees them all observe and reverence him, and take him as 
an oracle for wisdom, or as an angel of god, o how this

pleaseth his unsanctified selfish mind! now he hath his 
end, even that which he would have; and verily saith 
christ, they have their reward.

but when sanctification hath taught men to deny themselves, 
they see then that they are vile and miserable sinners, and 
loath themselves for all their abominations; and are base 
in their own eyes, and humble themselves before the lord, 
and abhor themselves in dust and ashes, and say, to us 
belongeth shame and confusion of face; not unto us o lord, 
not unto us, but to thy name give the glory, psal. 115. 1. 
dan. 9. 7, 8. the holy self-denying soul desireth no glory 
and honour, but what may conduce to the glory and honour of 
his lord: his heart riseth against base flattering 
worldlings, that would rob god and give the honour to him: 
nor can they do him a greater displeasure than to ascribe 
that to him belongeth only to god, or to bring to him or 
any creature, his makers due. if god be honoured, he takes 
himself as honoured, if he be never so low: if god be 
dishonoured, he is troubled, and his own honour will not 
make him reparation. as he liveth himself to the glory of 
god, and doth all that he doth in the world to that end; so 
would he have others do so too: and if god be most honoured 
by his disgrace and shame, he can submit.

and thus i have shewed you the true nature both of 
selfishness and of self-denyal. but observe that i describe 
it as it is in it self: but yet there is too much 
selfishness in the best, which may hinder the fulness of 
these effects. but self-denyal is predominant in all the 
sanctified, though it be not perfect.

