chap. i. showing the order of the words, and the doctrine of them. 

after that the report of our saviors many and great miracles, had caused many of the common people in great multitudes to follow after him; at length also a man of better note and esteem (though commonly the men of most note in the world, are most backward to the things of most use for the soul), bethinks himself of visiting, and conferring with him. this man, by name, is called nicodemus; by place, he was a ruler of the iewes; by degree, a doctor; by sect, a pharisee; a generation of men, not so glorious in the world, for their faire out-side, as loathsome to christ for their soul in-side. now because the carnal regard of his worldly credit (the main block that many times lies in the way of greatness, to hinder it from frequenting the poor and despised school of christ), made him unwilling to bee seen, and accounted one of the followers of the poor carpenter of nazareth: he therefore hides himself under the curtain of darkenesse, and chooseth the opportunity of the night-season; by benefit whereof, he might enjoy some private communication with our blessed savior, unobserved of his proud and spiteful fellow-pharisies. his first salutation to christ is formerly set down, and hath in it a manifest demonstration of much respect and reverence born unto him; for he doth acknowledge him to be a teacher sent of god, and gives a just reason of his such cofession, from the great miracles which he wrought, and did daily work amongst them, yond all possibility, either of ignorance or deniall. so hath our savior gotten a new scholar into his school, and therefore enters him (as it was fit he should, though he were for other learning a great scholar) into the very a, b, c, of christian religion, and begins to teach him the first principles and rudiments of the doctrine of slavation. the points of doctrine, wherein our lord instructeth this ruler and doctor are two; in themselues easy enough, yet the first and easiest of them goes much aboue his carnal and shallow capacitie. the first point is of the persons that shall be saved; the second, is of the causes of slavation and damnation. the former is in this verse propounded, and after to the thirteenth in more words discussed, upon occasion of nicodemus, his gross and vn-doctor-like obiection: for which grossenesse, he being gently reprehended, gives christ leaue to proceed in the second, without interruption, from the thirteenth verse to the two and twentieth. so then the words read, containe the very foundation and corner-stone, as i may term it, of the doctrine of christianitie, which christ seekes to lay fast, in the heart of the honest-hearted, but (for all his great learning) ignorant nicedemus. the words themselues draw us to two considerable points in them; the proof; the doctrine prooued. the proof, christs authoritie and word, deliuered in an earnestly-doubled asseueration; verily, verily, i (whom before thou didst confesse to be a teacher sent of god) the doctrine prooued, is about the y unto thee.biect of slavation, or the persons that may, or may t attaine eternall life, laid down in a conditionall proposition negatiuely, thus; vnlesse a man be (or if a man be not) born againe, he shall not see the kingdome of god. of christs vehement and repeated asseueration i will say nothing, but in that doctrine, whereof he sees cause to make so plaine and strong an affirmation, i will bee bold to dwell a while; because the knowledge of it is so exceedingly needfull, that without it, in vaine, and idle is all else that we can possibly know concerning god, or christ, or the doctrine of the scriptures. marke then, i pray you, this most necessarie instruction, and learne you (if you have not hitherto learned) at this time, that which this ancient teacher in israel was first set to learne, that no man can be saved, vnlesse he be regenerate. no person, be he iew or gentile, christian or pagan, pharisee or of other sect, ruler or of inferiour place, learned or vnlettered, doctor or of lower degree; no person, i say, of what nation, condition, wit, knowledge, virtue or other excellencie so ever he be, can possibly see (that is, enjoy), the kingdome of god (that is the blissefull estate of heavenly glory), if he be not born againe (that is made quite a new man, from that that he was in his first birth): not (as nicodemus too too grossely fancied) by a carnal re-entring into his mothers belly; but by a spirituall renewing of his whole man, in all the powers thereof. there is a total, and absolute impossibilitie of any mans being admitted into the place and state of celestiall happines, vnlesse he be regenerate. sooner may angels tume diuels; men beasts; and beasts stones; & all the world just nothing; then that any one vnrenewed person, shall have entrance into heaven. yea, as possible is it, that god should cease to bee god, as that any man, not made a-new according to the image of god, should be receiued into the blessed vision, possession, fruition of god; and of all utterly impossible things, this is (if of such things there might be any comparison) one of the most impossible; that there should bee any communion betwixt god and man (by gods participating his favor and blessednesse unto man), so long as man remaineth in the estate of his corrupted nature, not being created according to god, in righteousnesse and true holiness. it neither is now, nor ever was, nor ever shall bee found, that any man should get within the gates of the kingdome of glory; vnlesse he have first entred into the kingdome of grace, through the churches narrow wombe of regeneration. a new birth, is absolutely needfull to an eternall life: and in a word, regeneration of perfect necessity to slavation. it were a matter even very superfluous,, to seeke more proofes, after such a testimony, of such a witnesse (or author rather) as christ is. but the vnbeleeuing spirit of man doth stand in neede of ouer-abundant conuiction, in truthes of this straine. wherefore i will a while stand to make good this point, and then (after explanation) proceed to apply it. first, we may reade ezechiel crying out to the old church, in these words, make you a new heart, and a new spirit, for why will you die, o house of israel? what more euident, then that this question doth take it for granted, that the house of israel, the seede of abraham, followers of the true god, professors of true religion, sealed with circumcision, admitted unto the altar, and participating of the sacrifices according to the law, and worshipping the god of heaven, after the externall manner prescribed by himself: that these i say, (and therefore questionlesse none other) could not escape death, even eternall death; death of body, and death of soul, if they got not a new heart, and a new spirit; that is, (the same thing being expressed in diuersitie of phrases) were not born againe, as our savior pleaseth to tearme it. for this cause the same prophet a little after, and in one or two places more, calleth upon them, saying, returne and liue ye: so that but by conuerting, there is no living, and conversion and regeneration are always and altogether inseparable: therefore life and regeneration must needs go together; have one, and have both; misse one, and misse both. to the same purpose the author to the hebrewes speaketh, in these words, without holiness, (and that no man hath but by being born againe: for the image of god lost in adam, is not recouered but by the new birth in christ), i say, without holiness, no man shall see god. 

